
---
title: How use github-pages
description: to use github-pages based on Jekyll or hexo
categories: [tools, github pages]
tags: [tools, github pages]
---

                              Problem 1


** To move the cursor, press the h,j,k,l keys as indicated. **

** To quit
:q! <ENTER> 

** Press  x  to delete the character under the cursor. **

** Press  i  to insert text. **

** Press  A  to append text. **

** Use  :wq  to save a file and exit. **

                              Lesson 1 SUMMARY


  1. The cursor is moved using either the arrow keys or the hjkl keys.
         h (left)       j (down)       k (up)       l (right)

  2. To start Vim from the shell prompt type:  vim FILENAME <ENTER>

  3. To exit Vim type:     <ESC>   :q!   <ENTER>  to trash all changes.
             OR type:      <ESC>   :wq   <ENTER>  to save the changes.

  4. To delete the character at the cursor type:  x

  5. To insert or append text type:
         i   type inserted text   <ESC>         insert before the cursor
         A   type appended text   <ESC>         append after the line

NOTE: Pressing <ESC> will place you in Normal mode or will cancel
      an unwanted and partially completed command.


                              Problem 2


** Type  dw  to delete a word. **

** Type  d$  to delete to the end of the line. **

A short list of motions:
    w - until the start of the next word, EXCLUDING its first character.
    e - to the end of the current word, INCLUDING the last character.
    $ - to the end of the line, INCLUDING the last character.


** Typing a number before a motion repeats it that many times. **

** Typing a number with an operator repeats it that many times. **
d   number   motion


** Type  dd   to delete a whole line. **

** Press  u  to undo the last commands,   U  to fix a whole line. **

                            Lesson 2 SUMMARY


  1. To delete from the cursor up to the next word type:    dw
  2. To delete from the cursor to the end of a line type:    d$
  3. To delete a whole line type:    dd

  4. To repeat a motion prepend it with a number:   2w
  5. The format for a change command is:
               operator   [number]   motion
     where:
       operator - is what to do, such as  d  for delete
       [number] - is an optional count to repeat the motion
       motion   - moves over the text to operate on, such as  w (word),
                  $ (to the end of line), etc.

  6. To move to the start of the line use a zero:  0

  7. To undo previous actions, type:           u  (lowercase u)
     To undo all the changes on a line, type:  U  (capital U)
     To undo the undo's, type:                 CTRL-R


                          Problem 3

** Type  p  to put previously deleted text after the cursor. **

** Type  rx  to replace the character at the cursor with  x . **

** To change until the end of a word, type  ce . **

** The change operator is used with the same motions as delete. **

                              Lesson 3 SUMMARY


  1. To put back text that has just been deleted, type   p .  This puts the
     deleted text AFTER the cursor (if a line was deleted it will go on the
     line below the cursor).

  2. To replace the character under the cursor, type   r   and then the
     character you want to have there.

  3. The change operator allows you to change from the cursor to where the
     motion takes you.  eg. Type  ce  to change from the cursor to the end of
     the word,  c$  to change to the end of a line.

  4. The format for change is:

         c   [number]   motion



                          Problem 4

** Type CTRL-G to show your location in the file and the file status.
     Type  G  to move to a line in the file. **

** Type  /  followed by a phrase to search for the phrase. **

** Type  %  to find a matching ),], or } . **

** Type  :s/old/new/g  to substitute 'new' for 'old'. **
     type   :#,#s/old/new/g    where #,# are the line numbers of the range
                               of lines where the substitution is to be done.
     Type   :%s/old/new/g      to change every occurrence in the whole file.
     Type   :%s/old/new/gc     to find every occurrence in the whole file,
                               with a prompt whether to substitute or not.



                               Lesson 4 SUMMARY


  1. CTRL-G  displays your location in the file and the file status.
             G  moves to the end of the file.
     number  G  moves to that line number.
            gg  moves to the first line.

  2. Typing  /  followed by a phrase searches FORWARD for the phrase.
     Typing  ?  followed by a phrase searches BACKWARD for the phrase.
     After a search type  n  to find the next occurrence in the same direction
     or  N  to search in the opposite direction.
     CTRL-O takes you back to older positions, CTRL-I to newer positions.

  3. Typing  %  while the cursor is on a (,),[,],{, or } goes to its match.

  4. To substitute new for the first old in a line type    :s/old/new
     To substitute new for all 'old's on a line type       :s/old/new/g
     To substitute phrases between two line #'s type       :#,#s/old/new/g
     To substitute all occurrences in the file type        :%s/old/new/g
     To ask for confirmation each time add 'c'             :%s/old/new/gc


                          Problem 5


** Type  :!  followed by an external command to execute that command. **
** To save the changes made to the text, type  :w FILENAME  **
** To save part of the file, type  v  motion  :w FILENAME **
** To insert the contents of a file, type  :r FILENAME  **


                               Lesson 5 SUMMARY


  1.  :!command  executes an external command.

      Some useful examples are:
         (Windows)        (Unix)
          :!dir            :!ls            -  shows a directory listing.
          :!del FILENAME   :!rm FILENAME   -  removes file FILENAME.

  2.  :w FILENAME  writes the current Vim file to disk with name FILENAME.

  3.  v  motion  :w FILENAME  saves the Visually selected lines in file
      FILENAME.

  4.  :r FILENAME  retrieves disk file FILENAME and puts it below the
      cursor position.

  5.  :r !dir  reads the output of the dir command and puts it below the
      cursor position.


                          Problem 6


** Type  o  to open a line below the cursor and place you in Insert mode. **
** Type  a  to insert text AFTER the cursor. **
** Type a capital  R  to replace more than one character. **
** Use the  y  operator to copy text and  p  to paste it **
** Set an option so a search or substitute ignores case **


                               Lesson 6 SUMMARY

  1. Type  o  to open a line BELOW the cursor and start Insert mode.
     Type  O  to open a line ABOVE the cursor.

  2. Type  a  to insert text AFTER the cursor.
     Type  A  to insert text after the end of the line.

  3. The  e  command moves to the end of a word.

  4. The  y  operator yanks (copies) text,  p  puts (pastes) it.

  5. Typing a capital  R  enters Replace mode until  <ESC>  is pressed.

  6. Typing ":set xxx" sets the option "xxx".  Some options are:
        'ic' 'ignorecase'       ignore upper/lower case when searching
        'is' 'incsearch'        show partial matches for a search phrase
        'hls' 'hlsearch'        highlight all matching phrases
     You can either use the long or the short option name.

  7. Prepend "no" to switch an option off:   :set noic


                          Problem 7

** Command line completion with CTRL-D and <TAB> **

# ref
vimtutor
