---
title: how solve deadlock in concurrent computing ?
description: analysis deadlock and solve it
categories: [cs, operating system, concurrent, deadlock] 
tags: [cs, operating system, concurrent, deadlock]
---

# deadlock characterization and handling scheme

If we can get some characterizations about deadlock, then it will help us to find solution.

handling scheme
1. ignore the problem altogether and pretend that deadlocks never occur in the system.
2. prevent or avoid deadlocks, ensuring that the system will never enter a deadlocked state.
3. detect deadlocked state and recover it.

## deadlock description in perspective of concurrency
after ref APUE and CPlusPlus Concurrency In Action Practical Multithreading, I get direction of solving deadlock:
1. avoid nested lock
2. lock in order


But there is no perfect analysis to the problem about deadlock, until I find in Operating System Concepts.

## how handling deadlocks?

1. ignore the problem altogether and pretend that deadlocks never occur in the system.
2. prevent or avoid deadlocks, ensuring that the system will never enter a deadlocked state.
3. detect deadlocked state and recover it.


note: 
prevent deadlocks is implemented by breaking one of the necessary conditions that make deadlock happen.

avoid deadlock is implemented by deciding whether the current request can be satisfied or must be delayed on giving additional information in advance.


### what is the necessary conditions that make deadlock happen?

1. mutual exclusion
2. hold and wait
3. no preemption
4. circular wait

### how to prevent deadlock?

By ensuring that at least one of the four necessary conditions cannot hold, we can prevent the occurrence of a deadlock.

2. To ensure that the hold-and-wait condition never occurs in the system. 
(1) let each thread to request and be allocated all its resources before it begins execution. 
(2) let a thread request resources only when it has none. Before a thread can request any resources, it must release all the resources that it is currently allocated.

4. invalidate circular wait
(1) impose a total ordering of all resource types and to require that each thread requests resources in same order.
(2) each thread requests resources that is not in order with it has already, should first release that.

#### how to design ordering ?
manually make a absolutely ordering
layout resource hierarchy
topological sort to DAG

##### can hierarchy structure be convert to DAG ?

can we use the order of from top to down and left to right in hierarchy structure ?

### how to avoid deadlock ?

a thread can not declare the maximum number of resources that it may need larger than the system has in total.

avoid deadlock is implemented by deciding whether the current request can be satisfied or must be delayed.



### how detect deadlocked state ?

For a system that have a single instance of each resource type, if and only if the wait-for graph contains a cycle then a deadlock exists in the system.

#### how to detect cycle in a graph

1. whether a depth-first search finds an edge that points to an ancestor of the current vertex.(it contains a back edge)

2. many topological sorting algorithms will detect cycles too, since those are obstacles for topological sort to exists.

3. for directed graphs, distributed message-based algorithms can be used. These algorithms rely on the idea that a message sent by a vertex in a cycle will come back to itself.

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cycle_(graph_theory)#Cycle_detection

### how recover from deadlock ?

process and thread termination
  abort all deadlocked process.
  abort one process at a time until the deadlock cycle is eliminated.
resource preemption


## ref
APUE
CPlusPlus Concurrency In Action Practical Multithreading
Operating System Concepts
